TECH REPORT: automotive-software-and-electronics-2030-full-report
SOURCE: automotive-software-and-electronics-2030-full-report.pdf
============================================================

## KEY SECTIONS ##

### EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ###
developers), we discuss the implications of the trends and provide an overview of the areas 
requiring an adaptation to the future landscape. We then offer a way for each player to 
imagine a shift in orientation that will enable them to act on a concise set of strategy- and 
operations-focused actions.
Automotive OEMs need to develop a strategic perspective on SW and electronics

--------------------------------------------------

### METHODOLOGY ###
Due to the nature of this approach, the market already occurs during the development phase 
and not only after SOP as for the other models.
To pressure-test the results of our modeling, we conducted workshops with Global 
Semiconductor Alliance members in North America, Europe, and Asia. Based on workshop 
feedback we iterated the models towards the version presented in this report. 
Automotive software and electronics 2030
List of abbreviations
ACES Autonomous driving, connected vehicles, 
 electrification of the powertrain, shared mobility 
AD Autonomous driving
ADAS Advanced driver assistance systems
ASP Average selling price
AV Autonomous vehicle
BEV Battery electric vehicle
BJB Battery junction box
BMS Battery management system 
CAGR Compound annual growth rate
CMC Cell management controller
DC/DC Direct current to direct current
DCU Domain control unit
E/E Electrical and electronic
ECU Electronic control unit
EMS Electronics manufacturing services 
EV Electric vehicle
HEV Hybrid electric vehicle
HV High voltage
HW Hardware
ICE Internal combustion engine
I/O Input/output
LiDAR Light detection and ranging
LV Low voltage
MCFM McKinsey Center for Future Mobility
OEM Original equipment manufacturer
OS Operating system
PHEV Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle
SOP Start of production
SW Software
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Definitions 
SAE AV levels1
Vehicle classes
Although there is no Europe-wide formal characterization or regulation of vehicle segments, 
an EU document2 mentions the following classes:
A: mini cars
B: small cars
C: medium cars
D: large cars
E: executive cars
F: luxury cars
J: sport utility cars (including off-road vehicles)
M: multi-purpose cars (including pickups)
S: sports cars  
1 Source: SAE International J3016
2 Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 – Merger Procedure
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Important notice

--------------------------------------------------

### INTRODUCTION ###
standardization, the introduction of ethernet, and the evolution of the E/E architecture, harness 
variation is expected to be reduced also as more functionality will be defined by SW. While 
consolidation of ECUs into domain controllers might lead to higher cable volumes, these are likely 
to have much less variance. While today’s harness market in the high-price segment is primarily 
driven by customer-specific solutions, the standardization will enable (partial) automation of 
harness production. Therefore, the average value of the harness per car will decrease, leading to 
the overall shrinking LV market despite growth of the vehicle base.
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Beyond their impact on the business models and 
operational priorities of individual automotive players, 
the aforementioned trends will profoundly alter the 
market’s core value chains and affect all players along 
the automotive SW and electronics value chain. In the 

--------------------------------------------------

### TECHNOLOGY CATALOG ###
We distinguish a “base case” with moderate growth in EVs and AVs by 2030 as well as an 
“accelerated AV adoption case” with a much steeper growth in both vehicle types, but lower
Automotive software and electronics 2030
overall vehicle production due to cannibalization of private vehicles production through 
autonomous shared vehicles. Note that numbers presented in this article refer to the 
base case except where explicitly stated otherwise. In the vehicle production model, we 
differentiate production volumes by different categories, i.e., geography, OEM type (volume 
vs. premium), vehicle class, powertrain type, and SAE AV level. This differentiation is also 
present within the market models for each element of the automotive SW and E/E market. 
Hence, depending on the combination of the categories, such as SAE AV level and vehicle 
class, we assumed different values for the number of components and their ASP where 
appropriate. 
Given the significant uncertainty around the emerging SW market and the core elements, 
such as price points, monetization, sourcing models, and value chain/value capture, the 
automotive SW market model follows a different logic than those of HW components. 
The model considers the workforce required to build, maintain, and upgrade individual 
SW functionalities over time as the key driver of market size, taking into account typical 
supplier margins for SW as well. The model factors in the number of vehicle platforms and 
variants across OEMs and tiers, as well as their temporal evolution, are used to obtain a 
realistic perspective on the market size. To ensure consistency with the other models for E/E 
components, the applicability of the various SW functions across powertrains and SAE AV 
levels is also considered. Distribution of the market between OEMs, tier-1 suppliers, and other 
companies (e.g., IT service providers, engineering service providers) is not taken into account. 

--------------------------------------------------

### STRATEGIC OUTLOOK ###
obligation to update any forward-looking statements or to conform these forward-looking 
statements to actual events or developments.
McKinsey does not assume any responsibility towards any persons for the correctness and 
completeness of the information contained in this report.
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Contacts and 
authors 
Content contributors
Christian Knochenhauer, Senior Expert, Berlin
Georg Doll, Vice President IoT, Munich
Martin Kellner, Engagement Manager, Munich
Silviu Apostu, Consultant, Munich
Florian Haubner, Consultant, Frankfurt
Michaela Brandl, Consultant, Munich
Julia Werra, Consultant, Berlin
Denis Hörner, Research Analyst, MunichJan Paul Stein is an Engagement Manager in 
McKinsey’s Munich office. 
jan_paul_stein@mckinsey.comJohannes Deichmann is an Associate Partner in 
McKinsey’s Stuttgart office. 
johannes_deichmann@mckinsey.comOndrej Burkacky is a Partner in 
McKinsey’s Munich office. 
ondrej_burkacky@mckinsey.com
Automotive software and electronics 2030

Advanced Industries – Automotive & Assembly 
July 2019 
Copyright © McKinsey & Company 
Designed by Visual Media Europe
www.mckinsey.com

--------------------------------------------------

### APPENDIX ###
Appendix
Key aspects of the market models 
The insights of this report were generated based on closely linked qualitative and quantitative 

--------------------------------------------------

### TECHNOLOGY DEFINITION ###
 —What are the specific trends and drivers of the automotive sector’s SW and E/E growth 
dynamics and the changing landscape towards 2030? 
 —How are these drivers going to affect the automotive industry’s long-established value 
chains?
 —How can players in and outside of the industry optimally prepare for the upcoming market 
developments?
In the following three paragraphs, we provide a short answer to these questions while the 
remainder of this report will go into detail.
The insights of this report were generated based on closely linked qualitative and 
quantitative research. For the qualitative insights, we held interviews with executives in 
the automotive industry and combined them with the knowledge of internal key experts 
within our automotive practice to build a holistic view on how ACES trends and additional 
drivers will influence the automotive SW and E/E market.
For our quantitative market insights, we built bottom-up market models for each of the 
core components within the automotive SW and E/E market:
 —SW development, integration, verification, and validation 
 —Electronic control units (ECUs)/domain control units (DCUs)
 —Sensors
 —Power electronics
 —Other components (harnesses, controls, switches, displays).
At the highest level, these models (excluding SW) calculate the market size following the 
same logic. Market size is the product of the number of a certain component per vehicle, its 
average selling price (ASP), and the number of vehicles produced in a given year. To achieve 
the proper granularity of each model, we distinguish the key automotive domains (e.g., 
advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS), body, infotainment) as well as characteristics 
such as vehicle segment, original equipment manufacturer (OEM) type, or SAE AV level. 
The number of vehicles produced each year is provided by a separate model in which we 
incorporate data from latest McKinsey insights. The size of the automotive SW market is 
calculated based on the workforce across the supply chain involved in SW topics and the 
number of vehicle platforms and variants across OEMs and tiers and their change over time.

--------------------------------------------------

### REFERENCES ###
This report has been prepared by a McKinsey team based on public sources, extensive 
research, and proprietary information gathered both via in-depth interviews with industry 
thought leaders and from IHS Markit’s Light Vehicle Production Forecast (2018).
Neither the report nor any part of its contents is intended or suited to constitute the basis 
of any investment decision regarding any company operating in the markets covered by this 
report or any similar markets (including, without limitation, the purchase of any securities of 
any listed company or in connection with the listing of any company).

--------------------------------------------------

### CONCLUSIONS ###
have direct implications for HW and SW design on the chip level. Also, the importance of tool 
chain and services will grow. This growing importance also includes other features that are 
not directly product related but that are critical to product market success nonetheless. Here 
again, understanding the end customer’s requirements is crucial. For example, the OEM’s 
reluctance to create lock-in (e.g., in certain development tool chains) and the desire to reduce 
integration effort and cost (e.g., through the use of supplier-developed tool chains) need to be 
carefully weighed against each other. 
Place your bets wisely

--------------------------------------------------

## FULL REPORT CONTENT ##

Automotive software 
and electronics 2030
Mapping the sector’s future landscape

Authors
Ondrej Burkacky, Munich 
Johannes Deichmann, Stuttgart 
Jan Paul Stein, Munich
Acknowledgements
This study was conducted by 
McKinsey & Company, Inc. We wish 
to express our appreciation and 
gratitude to GSA and its members for 
their continued support and valuable 
contributions. Automotive software 
and electronics 2030
Mapping the sector’s future landscape

Table of contents
Introduction and key insights 6
1. Software and electronics will outgrow the automotive market 9
1.1 The software and electronics architecture in vehicles will see a major evolution 10
1.2 ACES trends and the architecture evolution will result in significant growth in the 
automotive electronics and software market 12
2. Key drivers of the automotive sector’s changing landscape 15
2.1 Software: the global automotive software market will show dynamic growth 16
2.2 Electronic control units/domain control units: convergence of electronic 
control units will open up a new market for domain controllers 19
2.3 Sensors: autonomous driving will be the primary trigger for sensor demand 23
2.4 Power electronics and harnesses: transition to EVs will enable the formation 
of a new market 26
3. Disruptive trends along the industry’s long-established value chains 29
3.1 New technologies are breaking up the “power dynamic” of traditional 
relationships between OEMs and tier-1 suppliers 30
3.2 Separation of hardware and software is leading to new sourcing models 31
3.3 New companies are entering the playing field in nontraditional and 
automotive areas 31
3.4 New partnerships and cooperation models are emerging – primarily for 
software- and electronics-related topics 34
4. Building blocks for mapping your automotive software and electronics strategy 35
4.1 Strategic considerations for each automotive player archetype 36
4.2 First steps for all players in navigating the changing landscape 38
Appendix 39
Key aspects of the market models 39
List of abbreviations 41
Definitions 42
Important notice 43
Contacts and authors 44
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Introduction and 
key insights
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Autonomous driving (AD), connected vehicles, electrification of the powertrain, and shared 
mobility (ACES) are mutually reinforcing developments in the automotive industry.
Combined, they are not only disrupting the automotive value chain and impacting all stake-
holders involved but are also a significant driver of the expected 7 percent compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR) in the automotive software (SW) and electrical and electronic components 
(E/E) market, i.e., from USD 238 billion to USD 469 billion, between 2020 and 2030. 
At this rate, the SW and E/E market is expected to vastly outpace growth in the overall 
automotive market, which is estimated to grow at 3 percent CAGR in the same time span. As a 
consequence, SW and electronics have become the focus of most automotive companies and 
their executives. 
In this context and based on our extensive research and analyses (Text box 1), we offer a 
perspective on three key questions: 
 —What are the specific trends and drivers of the automotive sector’s SW and E/E growth 
dynamics and the changing landscape towards 2030? 
 —How are these drivers going to affect the automotive industry’s long-established value 
chains?
 —How can players in and outside of the industry optimally prepare for the upcoming market 
developments?
In the following three paragraphs, we provide a short answer to these questions while the 
remainder of this report will go into detail.
The insights of this report were generated based on closely linked qualitative and 
quantitative research. For the qualitative insights, we held interviews with executives in 
the automotive industry and combined them with the knowledge of internal key experts 
within our automotive practice to build a holistic view on how ACES trends and additional 
drivers will influence the automotive SW and E/E market.
For our quantitative market insights, we built bottom-up market models for each of the 
core components within the automotive SW and E/E market:
 —SW development, integration, verification, and validation 
 —Electronic control units (ECUs)/domain control units (DCUs)
 —Sensors
 —Power electronics
 —Other components (harnesses, controls, switches, displays).
At the highest level, these models (excluding SW) calculate the market size following the 
same logic. Market size is the product of the number of a certain component per vehicle, its 
average selling price (ASP), and the number of vehicles produced in a given year. To achieve 
the proper granularity of each model, we distinguish the key automotive domains (e.g., 
advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS), body, infotainment) as well as characteristics 
such as vehicle segment, original equipment manufacturer (OEM) type, or SAE AV level. 
The number of vehicles produced each year is provided by a separate model in which we 
incorporate data from latest McKinsey insights. The size of the automotive SW market is 
calculated based on the workforce across the supply chain involved in SW topics and the 
number of vehicle platforms and variants across OEMs and tiers and their change over time.
Further details on the market models and their derivation are provided in the Appendix.Text box 1 
How we derive insights 
for this report 
Automotive software and electronics 2030
The SW and E/E components market will grow rapidly with 
significant segment-level variation driven by disparate impact of the 
ACES trends 
The move towards a more centralized SW and E/E architecture is an overall trend and a key 
driver of the market’s expected growth (7 percent CAGR) by 2030. Significant variation is 
expected across the market’s various segments. Power electronics is expected to occupy 
the high end of the market’s growth at 15 percent CAGR. Growth in the SW and sensors 
segments, expected to be at 9 and 8 percent, respectively, will be fueled by AD. The ECUs/
DCUs segment will continue to hold the largest share of the market, but growth here is likely 
to be relatively low, at 5 percent. While ECUs/DCUs will be used increasingly in the application 
of AD, price decreases from efficiency gains will counter-balance growth in the segment. 
Electric vehicle (EV) platforms will be a new market for high-voltage (HV) harnesses, while 
the demand for low-voltage (LV) harnesses is expected to shrink, resulting in the harness 
segment growing at the slowest rate. 
A separation of hardware (HW) and SW would fundamentally change 
the dynamics of the automotive industry’s player and value landscape
The days of OEMs comprehensively defining specifications and suppliers delivering on them 
may be nearing an end. Neither OEMs nor traditional suppliers are in a position to fully define 
the technology requirements of new systems. Codevelopment between OEMs and suppliers 
is expected to become not just prevalent but necessary. In addition, tech-native companies 
are expected to more boldly enter the space. This will be made easier as HW and SW sourcing 
become more separate. This separation would break up established value pools, reducing 
barriers to entry. For OEMs, the separation would also make both sourcing more competitive 
and scaling less complex and allow for a standardized platform for application SW while 
maintaining competition on the HW side.
Both archetype-specific and cross-player strategies can position 
companies for success in the future landscape
The set of strategic actions for OEMs includes a plan to keep the cost of ever-growing HW 
and SW development under control and establish a more agile cross-functional development 
organization. Cross-functionality would benefit tier-1 suppliers, too, as would actively 
partnering with OEMs to define their E/E architecture. Tier-2 suppliers will want to further 
specialize and scale within an attractive niche to thrive even as many components become 
commodity. All players will benefit from building their SW delivery and E/E architecture 
capabilities, embracing latest technology innovation (including UI, UX, analytics), and 
abandoning absolutistic notions of competition while analyzing the benefits of a partnership 
within an emerging ecosystem.
Automotive software and electronics 2030
In the next decade, the automotive industry will face a 
magnitude of change that has not been seen in a century. This 
change will be driven primarily by four mutually reinforcing 
trends, i.e., autonomous, connected, electric, and shared 
(ACES) vehicles. These will result in different user behaviors 
and mobility preferences, shifting value pools, innovative 
business models, and new entrants into automotive. All of 
these trends are enabled by the advancement of technology 
in electronics and SW and thus have a substantial 
impact on the automotive electronics and SW market. 1. Software and 
electronics will 
outgrow the 
automotive market 
1.1 The software and electronics architecture in vehicles will see a 
major evolution
As shown in Exhibit 1, the overall trend is a transition from a decentralized architecture 
(components connected by a central gateway in the 3rd generation of E/E architectures), in 
which functions are running on dedicated ECUs with high SW-to-HW integration, towards 
more centralized systems with dedicated domain controllers (4th generation). Finally, the 
architecture is expected to evolve into virtual domains (5th generation), in which one control 
unit runs functions or (micro-)services of different domains (e.g., infotainment and body control). 
The centralization will go along with a separation of HW and SW, leading to vehicle systems 
being built as a layered architecture with clear abstraction points at operating system (OS) and 
middleware layers. While this evolution will occur across domains over time, infotainment and 
driving assistance are expected to be the forerunners, as areas of high performance and/or low 
safety or latency criticality are easier and/or more beneficial to transform. 
The architecture evolution will impact multiple component markets:
 —DCUs will become a new market segment with high-performance computing units being 
deployed in vehicles, especially for ADAS, and with higher autonomous vehicle (AV) levels, i.e., AD.
 —ECUs will no longer be fully tied to the sourcing/development of SW functions. The change 
in business model is made possible by the separation of HW and SW. 
 —Automotive sensors, as a market, will be distinguished between smart sensors, which have a high 
degree of (pre-)processing capabilities versus raw sensors, which send data into a central DCU.
 —Sensors, harnesses, ECUs, and other HW components will become increasingly 
standardized and commoditized with the transition towards SW-defined functions, i.e., 
functionality will be realized through SW instead of additional HW (e.g., ADAS functions 
enabled on-demand based on a standardized set of sensors).
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Exhibit 1
The E/E architect ure is evolving from independent, func tion-speci/f_ic ECUs towards 
a centralize d architect ure
Generation Main features High-level architecture
Domain 
centralized
−Central domain controller
−Abilit y to handle more complex functions
−Conso lidation of functions (cost 
optimization)
−Collabo ration of ECUs within one domain
−Domain s: body/comfort, chassis, 
powertrain, and infotainment
−3-4 indepen dent networks
−Limit ed commu nication between domain s
−Independent ECUs
−Isolated functions
−Each function has its ECU (1:1 conne ction)Vehicle 
centralized 
−Virtual domain
−Limit ed dedic ated HW
−Ethernet backbone
−Complex functions, high 
performance comput ingE/E architecture
Distributed 
−Stronger collabo ration via central gat eway
−Cross-functional conne ction
−Abilit y to handle complex functions, e.g., 
adapt ive cruis e control
SOURCE: McK inseyBody/comfort Chassis Powert rain
Infot ainm entCentralgatewayDomain 
controller CentralgatewaySensor ActuatorInfot ainm ent
Centralgateway
1st2nd3rd4th5th
Today
Automotive software and electronics 2030
1.2 ACES trends and the architecture evolution will result in 
significant growth in the automotive electronics and software market
The effect of the ACES trends and the architecture evolution is a significantly growing automotive 
electronics and SW market. While the global automotive market is expected to grow from 
USD 2,755 billion in 2020 to USD 3,800 billion at a rate of ~3 percent p.a., SW and E/E will grow 
at a rate of ~7 percent p.a. from a total market size of ~USD 238 billion to ~USD 469 billion 
(excluding battery cells).1 Exhibit 2 shows the overall market figures as well as the breakdown by 
component and region.
Both in 2020 and 2030, ECUs and later DCUs compose the component group with the largest 
market share. The moderate growth in ECUs/DCUs is the result of two counteracting effects, 
i.e., a growing vehicle market and higher instance of functions based on electronics in each car 
versus decreasing unit costs and a cost decrease due to ECU consolidation into DCUs. With a 
rate of ~17 percent p.a., power electronics is the component group with the largest growth rate, 
primarily driven by EV adoption. Growth in SW and sensors is largely driven by the development 
and adoption of AD, requiring advanced SW functionality (e.g., object detection and classifica-
tion based on neural networks, raw data sensor fusion, and environmental modeling as well as 
algorithms for path planning), increased functional safety, and new sensor types (especially light 
detection and ranging, LiDAR). Other components are mostly growing in line with the automotive 
market due to higher electronics demand outweighed by decreasing unit costs. Geographically, 
the market will primarily be divided into the large regions of Europe, North America, and China, with 
regional hotspots for specific components, e.g., China for developing batteries and power electronics.
While growth of the total E/E market is expected to be stronger than that of the automotive 
market as a whole, the individual content of electronics and SW per car will differ hugely 
by segment, powertrain type, and SAE AV level. This is illustrated by three example vehicle 
configurations – a traditional SAE AV Level 1 volume car in the B segment (with an internal 
combustion engine, ICE), robotaxis (SAE AV Level 4 to 5 volume car in the C segment with 
battery electric vehicle (BEV) technology), and a premium SAE AV Level 3 vehicle with plug-in 
hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) technology – see Exhibit 3.
Exhibit 2
Automo tive SW and E/E market w ith a CAGR of 7% p.a. until 2030, largely driven by 
power el ectronics, SW, and ECUs /DCUs
63 76 85205081
92129156
3750
25 2030 2020238362469ComponentsAutomotive SW and E/E market
USD billions
+5%
+15%+10%
+8%+9%
+3%+7%CAGR 
2020-30
SW ( functi ons, OS, middleware)
Integrati on, veri/f_ication, and validation services
ECUs/DCUs
Sensors
Power electr onics (excl. battery cells)
Other electr onic components 
(harnesses, controls, switches, displays)Automotive sales
USD billions
+3% CAGR 2020-302020 2025 2030
2,755 3,027 3 ,800EU 112
China 161
US
Canada
Mexico68
RoW 78Korea
Japan50Total electronics and SW 
by geo graphy in 2030
469 TotalTotal
SOU RCE: McKinsey analysis; Revenue forecasts based on vehicle volumes from IHS Markit, Light Vehicle Production Forecast, October 2018; 
pull completed on November 6, 20181 Revenue forecasts based on vehicle volumes from IHS Markit, Light Vehicle Production Forecast, October 2018; 
pull completed on November 6, 2018
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Exhibit 3
Automotive SW and E/E cont ent per car
Volume car, 
L1 with ICE powertrainPurpose-built robo taxi
(L5) as BEVPremium car with 
L3 function and PHEV
894
105
822
162
21
25Batter ySW
Power electronicsECU/DCU
Sensors
Other electronics2025 2030
6712,1818,50818,164
2,275
6,227
2,614
2,0272,051
6,283
6,0473,6542,888
3,1281,732
2,1303,371
3,148
1,812
1,764
2,063
1,574
1,086
SOURCE: McKinsey analysisTotalSegmen t B C E/FUSD
2,023 38,297
19,45315,361
12,987 2,210
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Traditional SAE AV Level 1 volume cars in the B segment 
The electronics content of these cars will only change marginally. While more functions 
will expand into the mass market, commoditization of electronics and SW functions due to 
standardization of the architecture and scale effects will lead to decreasing prices, keeping 
content per vehicle stable.
Robotaxis
Electronic and SW costs for robotaxis will be significantly higher in 2025, driven primarily 
by high costs for sensors as well as a low vehicle base, across which the significant SW 
costs for SAE AV Level 4 to 5 can be distributed. With increasing numbers of robotaxis and 
commoditization of sensor technology (especially LiDAR), robotaxis will see a significant drop 
in SW and electronics costs by 2030, improving the business case for them.
Premium SAE AV Level 3 vehicles with PHEV powertrain
Electronics components in these cars will slightly devalue between 2025 and 2030 due 
to scale effects. The largest drop in individual contribution to cost will happen in SW as 
standardization and application of SW on a larger vehicle base at nearly zero marginal costs 
allows for better distribution of initial development costs.
Thus, market growth can be strongly attributed to the increasing penetration of vehicles 
with higher SAE AV levels and electric drive vehicles (xEVs). The production numbers of cars 
equipped with SAE AV Level 3 are expected to grow from somewhere on the order of 100,000 
vehicles in 2020 to more than 10 million vehicles in 2030. Additionally, the number of SAE AV 
Level 4 to 5 vehicles produced per year will surpass ~5 million in 2030. Finally, the worldwide 
share of EVs – hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), PHEVs, and BEVs-produced is likely to grow from 
less than 4 percent in 2020 to more than 20 percent in 2030.
The growing base of cars equipped with AD systems or electrified powertrains highly relying 
on SW and electronics will drive market growth and open opportunities for companies in this 
sphere. In the following chapter, we will explain the trends and drivers of growth in each of the 
component groups shown in Exhibit 2 in further detail.
Automotive software and electronics 2030
While the overall market growth offers significant upside 
across all components, factors like AV penetration and 
powertrain distribution will impact component groups 
differently. Yet most of the components show strong 
sensitivity to those factors as well as the total number 
of produced cars. Our detailed bottom-up model of the 
automotive SW and E/E market allows us to identify and 
quantify the impact that the core drivers (i.e., ACES trends) 
will have on the market dynamics described above. 
We will explain these drivers in the following chapter.2. Key drivers of 
the automotive 
sector’s changing 
landscape
2.1 Software: the global automotive software market will show 
dynamic growth 
Our analysis of the automotive SW market combines a functional grouping of SW functionality 
with a value chain perspective. From a functional point of view, the market can be divided into 
several SW domains along the technology stack. The OS and middleware are the low-level 
SW components that enable HW/SW separation and implement low-level functions. The 
SW functions running on ECUs, DCUs, or smart sensors can be grouped according to their 
functional domain: powertrain, chassis, energy, body, ADAS/AD, infotainment, middleware, 
OS, connectivity and security, and connected services. For each domain we have analyzed 
how the SW development effort will evolve by 2030, depending on the complexity of the SW 
functions and influence of ACES trends.
From a value chain perspective, there are three main phases of the SW development process 
to be considered: implementation of core functions (including adaptation of functionality for 
specific vehicle platforms), validation and verification of intended functionality, and system 
integration of SW modules. Our analysis has considered how the ratios between these phases 
vary depending on the functional domain – e.g., safety-related functions contain a higher 
share of validation and verification in the total development effort.
Some domains likely to grow strongly due to ACES trends, others to remain mostly 
constant or hit a plateau
Exhibit 4 shows the breakdown of the automotive SW development efforts by the different 
domains and tech-stack elements. Overall market size is expected to reach ~USD 84 billion by 
2030 and therefore more than double over the ten-year period from 2020 when the market size 
is estimated at ~USD 34 billion. While overall SW development is expected to increase, this will 
probably not be the case for all vehicle SW functions. Particularly, development related to ICE 
powertrains is likely to increase at only 1.5 percent year over year, and the market for chassis-
related SW is expected to stay almost flat until 2030. If the effect of a labor cost increase is 
controlled for, development effort for the chassis domain is expected to decrease by ~2 percent 
year over year as fewer ICE vehicle platforms are developed and the focus shifts to BEVs.
Exhibit 4
Breakdown of SW development eﬀorts into domains
USD billions
156
14
25 20208
6
5Body and energy
434
2030Infotainment, connec tivity, securi ty, 
connec ted servicesOS and middleware
Powertr ain and chassis5
ADAS and AD86384
+11%+9%
+9%+11%
+10%
+1%TotalCAGR 
2020-30
SOURCE: McKinsey analysis
Automotive software and electronics 2030
In turn, boosted by ACES trends such as increased connectivity, the pursuit of AVs, and 
electrification, other domains are expected to grow significantly. Functions in areas like 
AD, connected services, energy, or infotainment will gain complexity, as well as become 
increasingly relevant for a broader share of vehicle platforms.
OS and middleware represent a particularly interesting battleground. Specifically, established 
automotive tier-1 suppliers will compete in these areas with tech players who have experience 
in developing OSs in the consumer space. OS development efforts are focused on 3 OS types: 
event-driven, time-driven, and time-and-event driven, the last one being necessary for AD. 
We expect the market to converge towards a small number of alternatives for each type, which 
will in turn limit the size and growth of this market niche.
As already mentioned, developing the core SW functionality is only the first step in the 
development process. The important subsequent processes are customization for the 
specific vehicle platform, followed by validation, verification, and integration. After start of 
production (SOP) there is the maintenance of the SW, which is becoming more and more 
important and for our analysis has been treated as part of the normal development process. 
Combined, all of these stages increase SW development costs well beyond base costs for 
function development, as depicted in Exhibit 5 .
Increasing software complexity and broader deployment of vehicle platforms to 
underpin growth of software market until 2030
Three key factors contribute to the strong overall growth of the SW market: increase in SW 
complexity in the domains most influenced by ACES trends, customization effort for integrating 
functions in a growing number of platforms, and growing labor costs for SW developers.
In the upcoming years, SW will become one of the strategic development areas for the auto-
motive sector. This is because the continuous expansion of vehicle functionality – becoming 
more connected, managing the electric powertrain, AD – is enabled by increasingly powerful 
SW just as much as by HW. These developments are mutually reinforcing. Take the domains 
of infotainment and connected services as an example: once vehicles are able to drive 
Exhibit 5
Split ofSW marke tintoSW development, integration, and valid ation /veri/f_ication
213750 101724
4
Function developmentValidation and veri/f_ication
2020 25 2030Integration
+9%
+10%
+10%Total +9%CAGR 
2020-30
SOURCE: McKinsey analysisUSD billions
Automotive software and electronics 2030
autonomously, passengers will expect the infotainment system to integrate the kind of 
services that are currently typical of smartphones, e.g., virtual assistants, media consumption, 
and productivity SW. In another area poised for growth, energy management will be a prime 
target for further evolution with the proliferation of EVs.
All these developments must be enabled through a sustained effort in SW development and 
testing – programming more sophisticated functions, enabling interaction between SW 
modules, and extensive testing. Depending on the domain, ACES-trends-related factors are 
expected to contribute to the CAGR of the SW market with values between ~2 percentage 
points (infotainment) and ~15 percentage points (AD).
The necessity to expand the target functionality and customize the core SW for a broad range 
of vehicles is another important driver of the expected growth in the automotive SW market. 
As complex functions become mainstream, more and more vehicle platforms and variants will 
integrate them. This will lead to increased efforts from OEMs and tier-1 suppliers to customize 
and expand the SW. ACES trends will accelerate this need, as more vehicle platforms will 
be connected and require advanced energy management functions or AD features. We 
expect that by 2030 almost all vehicle platforms will have some form of data connectivity and 
incorporate ADAS features. For more “classical” SW domains (e.g., powertrain, chassis, body), 
the customization effort for different vehicle variants will remain an important multiplier for 
the costs of the base ECU SW.
Beyond function development and customization, validation and verification are the stages 
of the development process that ensure that the developed functions meet specifications 
and fulfill their purpose consistently and reliably. Validation and verification are expected to 
represent ~29 percent (USD 24 billion) of the total automotive SW market in 2030 (Exhibit 5). 
This significant share will be driven mostly by the need to verify safety-critical SW, e.g., ADAS, 
AD, security, as well as the OS deployed in the vehicles. The implication for automotive players 
is that they need to further invest in their capabilities to test and validate SW efficiently. For 
automotive players, this translates to adoption of more specialized tools and restructuring of 
teams to foster efficient validation and collaboration with HW teams.
Integration – at the system level – is the process of bringing together SW subsystems into a 
larger system. Estimated at USD 4 billion in 2020 and USD 10 billion in 2030, the integration’s 
12-percent share of the overall SW market is expected to remain stable. Yet, for some areas 
such as AD, its share of development is likely to significantly increase (up to 30 percent).
The increase in labor costs will also contribute to the overall growth of the market. Depending 
on the skill set, salaries are expected to grow annually between 2 percent and 6 percent by 
2030, with domain specialists and highly skilled developers at the higher end of the range.
The growth of the overall development effort in the coming decade is reflected in the growth 
of the sheer number of SW developers, totaling ~250,000 in 2030. The largest share of 
developers is expected to be concentrated in ADAS/AD and infotainment (~30 percent). As 
the number of SW developers increases, the market will likely see shifts in the distribution of 
the workforce. Specifically, organizations’ resources should be increasingly allocated to SW 
domains most impacted by ACES .
AD SW with highest yearly growth rate until 2030 due to increased complexity and 
integration effort
By 2030, AD SW (excluding ADAS) is expected to represent more than a quarter of the market 
value and grow at an average yearly rate of over 20 percent until 2030. Its growth exemplifies 
the key factors mentioned: increasingly complex functionality, increased validation and 
integration effort for AD functionality as it becomes integrated in more vehicle platforms, and 
growing labor costs for the highly specialized and scarce development resources. 
AD is likely to be the automotive SW domain where most OEMs and tier-1 suppliers place 
their strategic bets. The value of the market is expected to grow to ~USD 28 billion by 
2030. Increased functionality is one important driver. Elements such as sensor fusion or 
Automotive software and electronics 2030
environmental modeling will become more complex in the following years as AD-enabled vehicles 
will need to handle real-world situations. Especially for SAE Level 4 to 5, covering corner cases 
and ensuring the safety of the driver will become prohibitive after a certain point. For this reason, 
it is important to make critical decisions about what functionality is really needed. The market is 
expected to become more dynamic; thus specialized companies might seek to cover specific AD 
components.
Validation and verification as well as integration are also significant multipliers of the market 
value. We expect AD development costs to almost double due to validation and verification 
and integration. The reasons for this are the extensive testing and simulation that must be 
done to ensure safety, as well as the integration with different sensor configurations. This is 
likely to lead to increased collaboration between market actors to ensure integration is done 
efficiently, and costs are kept under control.
An important growth factor is the steady increase in labor costs for specialized SW devel-
opers and domain experts typically required for AD SW – we expect a CAGR of 4.5 percent 
given the profile mix. AD talent sourcing is likely to remain an important topic for all the market 
players and, in the short term, talent will continue to remain highly concentrated. However, as 
the market adapts and the technology and tools become better understood, we might see an 
increase in the available talent pool.
2.2 Electronic control units/domain control units: convergence of 
Electronic control units will open up a new market for domain controllers
ECUs and DCUs with a market potential of ~USD 156 billion in 2030
ECUs within a vehicle are responsible for controlling the electrical subsystems. Examples range 
from simple ECUs that control the engine that electrically moves passenger seats to complex 
ECUs like those responsible for ensuring optimal engine performance based on the input from 
various sensors. DCUs are the next level of evolution of ECUs, consolidating the functionality of 
several individual ECUs into a single, more cost-efficient system. In this context, an ECU or DCU 
is not only defined as an integrated circuit but as the full “box,” including, i.a., the printed circuit 
board or input/output (I/O) connectors. The combined ECU/DCU market size is expected to reach 
~USD 92 billion in 2020 and grow at a CAGR of 5 percent to ~USD 156 billion in 2030, as shown 
in Exhibit 6. As explained in Text box 1, to understand this growth, it is important to consider 
three factors: changes in vehicle production, ECU/DCU ASPs, and the number and distribution 
of ECUs/DCUs within each vehicle domain. First, vehicle production is growing at ~2 percent 
p.a., and second, ECU/DCU ASPs are declining at a rate of ~3 percent p.a. due to efficiency 
gains in ECU/DCU production. This effect is not compensated for by potential ASP increases 
due to performance or functionality gains. Third, there is a shift towards higher-cost ECUs/
DCUs driven chiefly by ACES trends. Due to the introduction of DCUs, the number of control 
units per vehicle does not increase further (see next section for a discussion of architectural 
considerations) so that this is not a driver of growth. At the same time, consolidation into DCUs 
can reduce costs for OEMs due to less common components (e.g., power supply). Note that the 
calculated market sizes include costs for low-level SW below the OS or middleware stack layers 
but exclude costs for functional SW as the latter is covered explicitly in the automotive SW market 
model (see Section 2.1).
The following paragraphs detail the drivers underlying the varying market size changes per 
vehicle domain that are shown in Exhibit 6.
Powertrain domain
Within the powertrain domain, the expected market growth at a CAGR of ~5 percent is largely 
driven by a shift towards EVs (i.e., PHEV, HEV, BEV). This is because the ECUs of EVs have 
a large ASP, i.e., up to ten times higher than that of ICEs accounting for their complexity. 
ICE vehicles only make a minor contribution to ECU/DCU market growth in the powertrain 
domain, as the ASP of ICE ECUs will remain largely stable over time. Overall, the market size 
of the powertrain domain is the largest, because the take rate of powertrain ECUs/DCUs for 
Automotive software and electronics 2030
engine, transmission, or battery control is virtually 100 percent.
Chassis domain
ECUs/DCUs in the chassis domain are mainly used for controlling braking, suspension, and 
steering. The expected rather low market growth of ~1 percent is because the growth in the 
vehicle production at ~2 percent is partially offset by declining ASPs. Most innovation is 
expected to take place in the context of electronically controlled braking and steering where, 
consequently, ECU ASPs are highest. The remaining systems such as ABS/ESP are largely 
commoditized with low, quickly declining ASPs. The shift towards more expensive ECUs will 
all in all result in a small net market growth.
Body domain
The body domain consists of a multitude of separate systems, such as access control, lighting, 
HVAC, window lift, seat control, door control, or gateway. Moderate growth of the ECU/DCU 
market in the body domain at an expected ~3 percent is mainly driven by the shift towards 
systems with more complex and, hence, more expensive ECUs, such as advanced front 
lighting or gateway systems.
ADAS domain
The ADAS domain comprises ECUs/DCUs utilized for controlling systems such as airbags, 
collision warning, tire pressure, or e-call telematics. DCUs become a prerequisite for SAE AV 
Level 3 vehicles and above, because the complexity of multiple separate ECUs in an SAE AV 
Level 3 system would be too high. Some OEMs may use ADAS DCUs even for SAE AV Level 1 
systems, e.g., in case time-to-market benefits are expected. Market growth at ~3 percent 
CAGR is largely driven by the growing incorporation of ECUs/DCUs that control ADAS and 
related functionality. Other ECUs, such as airbag or tire pressure control units, are largely 
commoditized and hence contribute little to overall growth.
AD domain
AD (SAE AV Level 4 to 5) represents a largely different segment in comparison to the afore-
mentioned “traditional” vehicle domains. Given that the production of those vehicles in 2020 
is virtually 0 and likely to reach ~6 million vehicles p.a. by 2030, AD DCUs are expected to 
grow significantly. Market size will likely grow from essentially 0 in 2020 to ~USD 34 billion by 
2030, largely because of the expected uptake of SAE AV Level 4 and Level 5 vehicles. Exhibit 6
ECU/DCU marke t by domain
USD billions
13
202010
26
20303914
30 19034
26
2713156
25+5%
n/aTotalCAGR 
2020-30
SOURCE: McKinsey analysis+1% ChassisAD
+3% ADAS-2% Infotainment
+5% Powertrain+3% Body
Automotive software and electronics 2030
AD DCU redundancy needs represent an additional factor leading to a large market size in 
2030, i.e., the second-largest ECU/DCU market in 2030.
Infotainment domain
In the infotainment domain, ECUs/DCUs are primarily used for controlling primary instrument 
clusters, navigation systems, or the vehicle audio system. The infotainment ECU/DCU market 
size is expected to decline at an annual rate of ~2 percent. The reason for this is a strongly 
decreasing number of ASPs for instrument clusters, car audio, and navigation systems. 
There is a shift towards solid-state displays as instrument clusters that entails the need for 
more complex control HW at better performance. However, this shift is not strong enough to 
compensate the overall decrease in market size. 
Convergence of architecture leading to major shift towards DCUs between 2025 
and 2030
After 2020, we expect a major shift in vehicle E/E architecture. The architecture will change 
from one with numerous separate ECUs (~100 ECUs for complex vehicles) towards a more 
streamlined architecture with a few central DCUs covering one vehicle domain each, such 
as chassis or infotainment. DCUs consolidate the non-time-critical functionality of multiple 
ECUs and process data from multiple sources centrally. For example, in a traditional, non-
DCU architecture, sensors such as cameras process captured data locally, and control 
actuators based on processing results. In a DCU-based E/E architecture, the data from 
multiple sensors such as cameras, radars, and LiDAR is processed centrally, e.g., for sensor 
fusion. Functionality that likely remains local, i.e., close to the sensor, is mainly related to the 
preprocessing of data to avoid congestion of the vehicle bus system. Also, latency-critical I/O 
functionality is expected to remain local.
The architectural shift towards a DCU-based architecture is induced by four key benefits:
 —First, the transition to an E/E architecture based on few central DCUs leads to a reduction 
not only of HW but also of SW complexity. This is because a domain-based architecture 
allows for a clear functional split within SW modules where higher-level functionality (e.g., 
sensor fusion) resides in DCUs and lower-level functionality (e.g., data preprocessing) 
resides within remaining local control units, e.g., in sensors. 
 —Second, a clear functional split of SW reduces validation cost, as the SW for a single DCU 
can be validated separately without having to incorporate a complex network of ECUs and 
their respective SW in the validation process. 
 —Third, in a domain-based architecture with DCUs, SW upgradability is simplified, which is 
especially relevant in the context of over-the-air (OTA) updates. 
 —Fourth and last, consolidation of multiple ECUs into a single DCU delivers reduced HW 
cost even when the majority of ECUs will remain local at reduced functionality. Savings are 
expected to come not only from the reduction in ECU-related HW costs, but also from a 
reduction in secondary costs, e.g., the wiring harness.
The speed of transition from an architecture with separate ECUs to centralized DCUs differs 
by domain. The infotainment domain is fastest because ECU functionality is virtually neither 
latency- nor safety-critical, and there is the clear benefit of enabling relatively simple SW 
updates. Updates are not only a prerequisite for the security (and safety) of connected 
applications in the infotainment domain, they may also enable an improved user experience 
and, hence, have a directly monetizable customer benefit. In contrast, we expect a slower 
transition in the body domain due to a relatively large number of separate ECUs, e.g., for 
doors, windows, seats, or HVAC. Much functionality has already been consolidated in body 
control modules. At the same time, there is only a limited benefit of further consolidation, as 
there is comparatively little need for upgradability in the body domain. 
Automotive software and electronics 2030
We expect that the speed of transition is also driven by the adoption of higher SAE AV levels. 
Vehicles with SAE AV Level 3 and above require a HW architecture that supports a clear 
functional split and easy upgradability for the relatively complex ADAS and AD functionality. 
Especially the latter is important because it is safety critical to ensure that the most recent 
ADAS/AD SW version is running on vehicle systems at any time. Therefore, AD functionality is 
expected to naturally entail a domain-based architecture.
Specifically, between 2020 and 2030, the structure of the automotive market for control units 
is expected to shift from one that is almost entirely comprised of ECUs (98 percent) into one 
where DCUs represent ~43 percent of the market as shown in Exhibit 7. In the base-case 
scenario, the halfway point in this transition is expected to arrive two “car generations” from 
now in 2025, when DCUs will represent 20 percent of the control-unit market. In the accelerated 
AV adoption case (see Appendix 1 and the right-hand side of Exhibit 7), we expect a faster rate in 
the ECU-to-DCU transition than in the base case in the time frame 2025 to 2030. In 2025, the 
DCU share is likely to be ~17 percent and expected to increase to ~54 percent in 2030. 
The differences between the base case and the accelerated AV adoption case are due to 
different assumptions in vehicle production and adoption rates of higher SAE AV levels, 
especially in the years 2025 to 2030. In the accelerated case, the number of SAE AV Level 4 
to 5 vehicles is expected to be about twice as high as in the base case. Vehicles at higher SAE 
AV levels are assumed to have a higher DCU penetration due to a higher degree of freedom 
in architecture and the increased need to centrally process data from various sensors. The 
overall market size in the accelerated case of ~USD 207 billion in 2030 is higher than that of 
the base case of ~USD 156 billion in 2030 for two reasons. First, as previously discussed, the 
share of SAE AV Level 4 to 5 vehicles that need a costly AD DCU is higher. Second, the share 
of EVs requiring relatively more expensive engine and battery control units is higher in the 
accelerated case as well.
Exhibit 7
Change of split be tween DCU and ECU over time in base case and accel erated 
AV a doption case
ECU/DCU market, USD billions
(43% )
(2%)
(57%)
(98% )26
(20% )
(80% )
2030921291562020-25
+7%
+68%
(90% )2
(2%)
(46%)
2020 25105
(83%)21
(17%)111
(54%)
+ 3%2020-30
+5%
+43%
0%+7%
+61%
+3%+9%
+50%
+1%DCU
ECU
Base case Accelerated AV adoption case
SOURCE: McK insey analysisTotalCAGR 2020-25 2020-30
Total
Automotive software and electronics 2030
2.3 Sensors: autonomous driving will be the primary trigger for 
sensor demand
Most sensors are growing in line with overall automotive market growth. Sensors related to 
ADAS/AD are the single driver for the above-average expected growth in automotive sensors. 
An increasing adoption rate of ADAS and AD will be responsible for an overall expected 
growth rate of 8 percent in automotive sensors (Exhibit 8).
More specifically, this growth will most likely be seen in ADAS/AD systems starting from SAE 
AV Level 3 due to the near-full autonomy of the system and the higher requirements and costs 
(and introduced redundancies) regarding the sensors used at this level. The following is a 
description on a vehicle domain level of how the various sensor categories contribute to the 
overall growth trajectory.
Powertrain sensors
Powertrain sensors play a role in the operation of the engine, transmission, and alternator. 
The costs of these sensors vary greatly depending on the engine type (e.g., BEV, HEV, ICE, 
PHEV) with the number of required sensors decreasing with an increasingly electric engine. 
With the shift towards electrification, the volume of powertrain-related sensors is expected 
to decrease. On top of that, powertrain sensor costs in BEV vehicles are also lower. Together, 
the electrification trend and the commoditization of sensors are likely to lead to a shrinking 
market with a CAGR of -1 percent between 2020 and 2030.
Chassis sensors
Chassis sensors monitor functions, such as braking, steering, and suspension. In general, 
innovation related to these sensors is quite low, and this leads to price pressure. These 
sensors are, however, integrated in ADAS/AD use cases, particularly when it comes to the 
safety redundancies implemented in the braking and steering features of SAE AV Level 3 
vehicles. Together, these realities put the growth of chassis sensors slightly above the CAGR 
of the overall vehicle market at 4 percent.
Exhibit 8
Total automotive sensor marke t will outgrow automotive sales primarily driven by strong 
growth in AD AS sensors
5
10
25
8
203044Total automotivesensormarket, USD billions
CAGR 
2020-30
+5%
ChassisBody
+4%
-1%
+13%−Traditional powert rain sensors with increas e in 
line with growth of automotive market
−New sensors for elect ric drives (e.g., current 
sensors) counterbalance the decline of 
combustion sensors−Body sensors with positive outlook due to 
increas e of comfort features oﬀsetting decline 
of prices of commodit y-type sensors
−ADAS/safety as strong est growing domain due 
to adopt ion of ADAS and AD features
−Growth primarily driven by increas ing demand 
for cameras, radars and introdu ction of LiDAR 
sensors at scale−Increas ing number of chassis sensors, e.g., due 
to requ irements for ADAS/AD systems and 
addit ional comfort features, e.g., air suspens ion 
or back ax le steering 
Powertrain
ADAS/AD+8%
Automotive production
Million units
+2% CAGR 2020-30202020252030
97 108 115ChassisBody
Powertrain
ADAS/AD
SOURCE: McKinsey analysisTotal 63
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Body sensors 
Body sensors measure the state of the vehicle in ways less related to active performance than 
safety/AD sensors. For instance, body sensors capture and convey information regarding 
door/roof closure, seat occupancy, and the amount of sunlight/rainfall and can trigger alerts 
and basic functions of the vehicle body accordingly. Growth of this sensor type is expected 
at 5 percent CAGR, which is mainly due to growth of the vehicle market and additional body 
functionality and higher safety requirements for body functions in SAE AV Level 4 to 5 vehicles. 
ADAS/AD sensors
ADAS/AD sensors include cameras, LiDAR, and radar. The sensors required for SAE AV 
Level 1 to 2, mainly a combination of camera and radar, are largely safety related. The safety 
functions required for 5-star NCAP drive the increasing demand for cameras and radars. 
Compared to lower SAE AV levels, ADAS/AD sensors used in SAE AV Level 3 and up come at 
a higher cost. As a prerequisite technology, LiDAR’s high price point is the main cost driver at 
these SAE AV levels. The redundancy requirements starting with SAE AV Level 3 also require 
a higher number of sensors per vehicle. Robotaxis/shuttles are among the SAE AV Level 4 
to 5 use cases with these significantly higher sensor requirements and costs. A CAGR of 
12 percent is expected for these sensors, due to significant increases in production rates 
of SAE AV Level 1+ vehicles driven by safety regulations and safety tests (with emergency 
braking assists, in particular) as well as in SAE AV Level 3+ vehicles. Other sensors in the 
ADAS/AD domain, including airbag sensors, tire pressure sensors, and ultrasonic sensors, 
are growing with a 6-percent CAGR.
Sensor setup for autonomous cars 
Exhibit 9 shows exemplary sensor configurations for different levels of autonomy. SAE AV 
Level 1 to 2 vehicles typically have one front-facing long-range radar sensor and one camera 
for adaptive cruise control, emergency brake assist, and lane departure warning/assistant. 
Two backward-facing medium-range radar sensors enable blind-spot detection. Up to four 
additional cameras and up to 12 ultrasonic sensors allow a 360° view for parking assistant 
functions.
In addition to the sensor set of SAE AV Level 1 to 2 vehicles, we expect SAE AV Level 3 
vehicles to typically have one more front-facing long-range LiDAR for redundancy and for 
situations where other sensors reach their physical limitations, e.g., cameras at night or 
Exhibit 9
Sketch ofa vehi cleand itssensorsetupforAD
Level 2 Level 3 Level 4/5Long -range radar Short-and medium-range radar Camer a Long -range LiDA R Short-range LiDA R
SOURCE: Expert interviews; Waymo Safety Report ; Audi press annou ncements; GM investor presentation
Automotive software and electronics 2030
glaring sunlight. The LiDAR sensor is also characterized by a high resolution, wide angle, 
and high accuracy due to active distance measurement, which will be needed to detect and 
classify objects or track landmarks for localization. For highway pilot applications, a second, 
rear-facing long-range LiDAR sensor is typically used. 
Additional short-range front-facing radars could improve the detection of vehicles cutting into 
the lane, while a backward-facing radar detects approaching vehicles on a highway. A driver-
monitoring camera might be required to assess attention of the driver, who is required to take 
over the car if necessary.
SAE AV Level 4 to 5 vehicles usually require a 360° view with different sensor technologies 
to provide redundancy and to level out disadvantages of each sensor principle, e.g., camera 
detection to the side of the vehicle at night. To provide this 360° view, five to ten cameras, eight 
to 12 radar sensors, and five to 12 LiDAR sensors could be used (spinning, long-range LiDAR 
sensors could be replaced by several solid-state sensors in the medium term). Exhibit 9 
shows a typical setup with eight cameras, eight radars, and four long- and four short-range 
LiDARs. With additional sensors, like microphones and ultrasonic sensors, the number 
of additional sensors for SAE AV Level 4 to 5 could easily reach 50 sensors or more. 
Unforeseeable innovations or breakthroughs in the sensor technologies could change the 
sensor setup for AD in the long term.
On top of these outward-facing sensors, there are additional sensors either required or 
optional for safety systems, e.g., acceleration sensors for crash detection and airbag release, 
rollover sensors, seat occupant sensors, night-vision and tire-pressure sensors. 
Price erosion and technological advancement to shape the ADAS/AD sensor market
The market for ADAS/AD sensors is expected to grow by 12 percent p.a. Exhibit 10 shows, 
that this growth will be mainly driven by the LiDAR market, which is hardly existent today but 
will likely take the ADAS/AD market to USD 13 billion in 2030. The radar sensor market is also 
growing by 13 percent p.a. and is likely to be the largest sensor market in 2030 with a market 
size of ~USD 14 billion. Other safety sensors are expected to grow with a CAGR of 6 percent 
p.a. driven by increased vehicle sales and increased safety requirements, especially since 
emerging markets are catching up with the stricter regulations in Europe and the US. 
Exhibit 10
Split of marke t by sensor types in AD AS/AD for 2020 vs. 2030
USD billions
0(0%)
20204(31%)
4(33%)8
(18%)
(29% )
5(36%)14
(33% )
(20% )LiDAR
Camera
Radar
Other (e.g., ultrasonic )1343 +13%
+80%
+7%
+13%
+6%
SOURCE: McK insey analysisTotalCAGR 
2020-30
Automotive software and electronics 2030
The market for other sensors (e.g., ultrasonic) is expected to grow at 6 percent p.a. driven by, 
for example, the tightening of the Euro NCAP regulation, and likely to reach a market size of 
~USD 9 billion in 2030. 
LiDAR sensors are positioned for strong growth (an anticipated rate of ~80 percent p.a. 
through 2030). This technology is currently only in place in a limited number of vehicles, but 
these sensors will be key elements of the growing number of SAE AV Level 3+ vehicles.
“Mass market” as a force to shape LiDAR technology
Today’s testing vehicles for urban automated driving are usually equipped with mechanical 
LiDAR sensors with spinning parts. Once LiDAR sensors become available in the mass market 
in the early 2020s, however, we expect a switch to solid-state sensors. Initial solid-state 
sensors will come at a relatively high price point compared to cameras or radars, but the price 
is expected to drop rapidly due to an uptake in numbers, and they should be able to deliver 
higher robustness. Even after erosion, however, the price of solid-state LiDAR sensors is 
expected to remain higher than that of other environmental sensors. 
As there is a lot of research going on in the sensor field, there might be unforeseeable technology 
changes. These new technologies could change the assumed number of sensors per car or price 
points per sensor. This would also lead to a different split between sensor technologies in the 
market. 
Notably, the cost of LiDAR sensors will be added on top of the costs of the high-performance 
AD DCUs. This is a main reason for why urban AD is likely to be deployed first in robotaxis/ 
-shuttles, where customers are not as price sensitive as private car buyers. 
2.4 Power electronics and harnesses: transition to EVs will enable the 
formation of a new market
The power electronics market is expected to have the largest relative growth with 15 percent 
CAGR until 2030, not taking into account the battery cells (Exhibit 11).1 This growth is primarily 
driven by adoption of xEVs, which require significant amounts of power electronics, as 
1 A more detailed analysis of the power electronics market will be featured in our upcoming publication “Reboost – a view 
on the changing powertrain components market and how suppliers can succeed.”
Exhibit 11
Power electronics marke t –breakdown of compo nents
USD billions
15
11
On-board charger8
BJB9
202018
611DC/DC converter
CMC
E-motor
Inverter53 149BMS
25172081 +15%
-21%
+20%
+16%+19%
+18%
+9%Total
+13%
SOURCE: McKinsey Sustainable Initiat ive Powert rain Model, McKinseyCAGR 
2020-30
Automotive software and electronics 2030
well as introduction of mild HEVs to complement traditional combustion engines. Inverters 
are expected to represent the largest product category in 2020 due to their higher ASP 
than e-motors in the LV market segment, yet a multitude of components with different 
technologies compose the overall power electronics market. In the long term, battery junction 
boxes (BJBs) are projected to capture the highest market share.
The biggest driver and also biggest uncertainty for power electronics growth is the adoption 
rate of xEVs. This in turn depends significantly on the industry’s ability to decrease production 
costs of batteries to satisfy customer demands for range and expected sales price for vehicles 
as well as regulatory steering. This would be self-reinforced by an increase in production 
capacity, technological advancement, and competitive pressure, that will decrease the price per 
kWh for batteries further, again leading to higher EV adoption. An additional effect is a potential 
higher adoption of SAE AV Level 4 to 5 vehicles, especially robotaxis. As robotaxis are expected 
to have a relatively higher share of BEV powertrains than other vehicles, a higher growth will 
boost also the power electronics market.
Our growth projection includes two core effects: first and obviously, the overall automotive 
sales growth, including xEV adoption as described above. Second, standardization and 
commoditization of core product segments such as 40 to 150 kW inverters or 48 V systems, 
are likely to lower entry barriers for semiconductor tier-2 suppliers to offer more integrated 
systems and therefore increase competition and put pressure on system ASPs.
The harness is an additional key component of the vehicle for data and power transmission. 
The global automotive harness market is expected to grow at a moderate rate (Exhibit 12). The 
LV harness represents the majority of the market. There are two countering effects impacting 
the harness market. Combined, these effects are expected to have the net impact of giving 
the market a growth rate that, at ~1 percent p.a. from 2020 to 2030, is below the overall 
automotive sales growth. 
Major growth driver for harnesses is the introduction of EV platforms. This will open a new, 
strongly growing market for HV harnesses that connect HV battery, charger, e-motor, and 
further HV components inside the EV. While current BEV models are mainly built on existing 
Exhibit 12
Automotive harne ssmarke t
USD billions
254316
2030HV harness
LV/d ata harness50
4448+1%
+20%
0%
SOURCE: McKinsey analysisTotalCAGR 
2020-30
Automotive software and electronics 2030
ICE platforms and thus the harness is not fully efficient, native BEV platforms will have more 
efficient designs. This efficiency gain is exhibited by the difference in cable weight for the 
powertrain harness between the first and second generation of an EV between 2011 and 2017. 
The respective weights of 6.2 kg and 2.1 kg correspond to a weight reduction of 66 percent. 
Despite the ASP reduction of individual harnesses, the overall HV harness market is expected to 
grow significantly driven by increasing EV penetration. 
On the other side, the LV harness segment is expected to shrink due to ASP reduction. Due to 
standardization, the introduction of ethernet, and the evolution of the E/E architecture, harness 
variation is expected to be reduced also as more functionality will be defined by SW. While 
consolidation of ECUs into domain controllers might lead to higher cable volumes, these are likely 
to have much less variance. While today’s harness market in the high-price segment is primarily 
driven by customer-specific solutions, the standardization will enable (partial) automation of 
harness production. Therefore, the average value of the harness per car will decrease, leading to 
the overall shrinking LV market despite growth of the vehicle base.
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Beyond their impact on the business models and 
operational priorities of individual automotive players, 
the aforementioned trends will profoundly alter the 
market’s core value chains and affect all players along 
the automotive SW and electronics value chain. In the 
following, we will discuss the key implications of the 
changes described above on existing stakeholders’ value 
chains, threats and opportunities, and points of entry 
for new players from other industries and start-ups.3. Disruptive 
trends along 
the industry’s 
long-established 
value chains 
3.1 New technologies are breaking up the “power dynamic” of 
traditional relationships between OEMs and tier-1 suppliers
Traditionally, automotive OEMs have specified the high-level functionality requirements 
of individual components. Then, tier-1 suppliers (and the supply chain behind them) have 
delivered integrated systems based on those functional specifications. The technologies, 
know-how, and low-level specifications are unique to the respective tier-1 and tier-2 suppliers. 
The technology trends described above, however, are changing these roles, especially for 
electronics and SW components for a variety of reasons: 
 —First, OEMs and end customers can be expected to demand systems combining “best of 
breed” features, and no single supplier will be able to deliver a full, best-in-class system 
covering all technologies end to end in a competitive way.
 —Second, capabilities required for new systems, especially for SW, do not exist at sufficient 
levels in the traditional industry structures. This creates opportunities for new entrants 
(e.g., SW companies) with the ability to approach the market with different collaboration 
models than incumbents. 
 —Finally, the growing complexity and cross-system integration of SW and electronics 
requires the collaboration of OEMs and their partners as early on in the process as the 
design phase. It also impedes traditional dual- or multisourcing paradigms, as long as 
standard interfaces/frameworks have not yet been established in the market (see HW-SW 
separation below). 
These new realities may have specific implications for the relationship between OEMs and tier-1 
suppliers. Namely, design specification is likely to be more of a codevelopment process. In 
this situation, OEMs and tier-1 suppliers will deliberately “lock themselves in” together for the 
duration of a project to handle complexity and deliver time to market. To maintain some level 
of independence, such approaches will more frequently be coupled with dual-sourcing to 
build-to-print or AD services (electronics manufacturing services, EMS) providers that get the 
right to only manufacture the system that had been developed within the OEM-tier-1-supplier 
partnership.
However, these models lack the single point of responsibility that was guaranteed by the 
classic tier-1 supplier business model. Therefore, it remains to be seen how much this will 
extend into the market and, in particular, which players, both on the OEM and the tier-1 
supplier side, will build up the necessary capabilities to sustain this model successfully.
Automotive software and electronics 2030
3.2 Separation of hardware and software is leading to new 
sourcing models
Currently, the majority of SW is combined with HW in a single “package” and sourced from 
a tier-1 supplier. This model is largely a result of the fact that most functionalities in vehicles 
currently are single-function devices with a relatively simple interface (such as CAN bus). 
However, new roles in the market and go-to-market strategies are also being created, 
including the model where OEMs source pure SW only, HW and integration combined, or even 
pure system integration engineering services. 
Separating HW and SW, if successful, would create two main advantages for OEMs: 
 —First, it would reduce complexity as HW and SW can be sourced, scaled across classes/
tiers, and innovated independently of each other. 
 —Second, separate sourcing would break the value pool of integrated system providers, 
lowering entry barriers for new entrants by, for example, allowing SW pure players access 
to automotive (see above). For the OEM, it would allow a standardized SW platform while 
keeping competition on the HW to avoid costs through lock-ins. This certainly threatens 
the value pools of established tier-1 suppliers, but an increase in competition among 
suppliers could be a benefit to OEMs.
There are other significant implications of a new sourcing model. Since SW is more about R&D 
costs (“zero marginal costs”) than unit costs, the traditional HW sourcing approach will make 
way for new realities. First, single-sourcing solutions and strategic partnerships will arise. 
Next, secondary factors, such as toolchain integration, development excellence (e.g., defect 
resolution time), and testing automation will become key differentiators, and buyers need to 
be able to judge those. Finally, the SW life cycle will extend beyond ten years after SOP. This 
means that finding the right strategic, contractual and operational sourcing approaches to 
optimize life cycle cost and customer delivery will be crucial.
3.3 New companies are entering the playing field in nontraditional 
and automotive areas 
Based on the findings of our proprietary Start-up and Investment Landscape Analysis 
(SILA), we can paint a detailed picture of the evolving battleground in automotive. Every 
third automotive company in operation today was founded within the past two decades. 
Unsurprisingly, this number is fueled by automotive SW and electronics companies 
operating around ACES trends, especially providers of infotainment, connected services, 
and cybersecurity (44 percent of which were founded since 2000), and ADAS/AD system 
providers (38 percent of which are less than ten years old). In terms of headquarters, 
34 percent of the new companies founded over the past ten years are based in the US and 
28 percent in China, showcasing the innovative drive through start-ups in the US as well as 
the growing technology focus in China. 
Automotive software and electronics 2030
As can be seen from the SILA landscape and cluster analysis (Text box 2 and Exhibit 13), [1] 
OEMs, [2] tier-1, [3] powertrain/chassis and [4] power electronics suppliers are positioned 
in the middle of the network graph. These “traditional” companies, with a median founding 
year between 1964 and 1973, form the backbone of the network and provide the fundamental 
parts of a vehicle. Those clusters are highly integrated and show a strong interaction with 
other automotive players.
McKinsey’s Start-up and Investment Landscape Analysis (SILA) tool reveals areas with 
the largest investment activity by using big-data algorithms and semantic analytics. It 
leverages inputs from comprehensive private and venture capital investment databases 
covering about 2 million companies. Furthermore, it analyzes developments over 
time and across regions and identifies implicit technological similarities between 
organizations. 
This information helps to identify trends in the automotive landscape and to locate 
technology capabilities. Of course, it only takes into account the external investment 
view; it does not cover internal investments, such as R&D expenses.
Towards the edges of the graph, [5] battery, [6] semiconductor, and [7] infotainment, 
connected services, and cybersecurity suppliers are separated from the main network of 
core vehicle functions. These players are clustered together in a natural way as they provide 
unique, add-on technology solutions to tier-1 suppliers and OEMs. 
The cluster for [8] ADAS/AD system suppliers, on the other hand, is spread out, indicating a 
difference in product and service offers. Hardly surprising, ADAS/AD system suppliers show 
similarities to [9] automotive sensor suppliers. This may be explained by the overlaps in their 
product portfolios, e.g., sensor suppliers might decide to introduce ADAS/AD systems and 
vice versa.
Shifting the focus to past transactions, most funding (in terms of number of transactions 
received) was provided to companies headquartered in the US, China, and South Korea. This 
is also true for five out of the nine product categories ([4], [5], [6], [7], [9]). For the clusters [1] 
OEMs and [2] tier-1 suppliers, companies headquartered in two out of the three countries 
were among the top three. In Europe, German companies were ranked among the top three in 
the categories [1] OEMs, [3] powertrain/chassis, and [8] ADAS/AD systems. 
Looking at the different market players, it becomes obvious that traditional companies 
[1-3] received more than 80 percent of their transaction value through public offering. But 
[4] power electronics suppliers saw an equal number of transactions through M&A, private 
placements, and public offerings. Reasons for this may be related to the high specialization 
of power electronics companies and their comparatively smaller sizes and, consequentially, a 
lower share of publicly-listed power electronics companies.
On the other hand, nontraditional, emerging start-up companies ([5], [7], [8], [9]) that fuel the 
automotive revolution received at least 70 percent of their transaction value through seed 
funding/private placements or M&As. The transaction volume spent on M&As for [8] ADAS/
AD system providers (43 percent of transaction value in this cluster) and [7] infotainment, 
connected services, and cybersecurity providers (38 percent) is especially high, showing the 
race and need for innovative SW solutions.Text box 2 
Start-up and Investment 
Landscape Analysis: a big-
data tech-finding tool 
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Exhibit 13
Automotive SW and E/E ne twork map
SOURCE: McK insey analysisSpecialized solutions
ADAS/ AD/sens orsCore t echnolog yIndividual company Company similarity
1
34
9
Cluster name
2
8
6Power electronic s suppliers Infotainment, connec ted 
services, and cybersecurity 
supplier sTier-1 supplier s
Autom otive sensor suppliersSemic onductor suppliersBattery supplier s
Powert rain/ chassi s suppli ersADAS/AD system suppl iersOEMs
Automotive software and electronics 2030
3.4 New partnerships and cooperation models are emerging – 
primarily for software- and electronics-related topics
As the complexity and costs of new SW-driven functions, e.g., for AD or connected cars, 
are huge, we see increased cooperation to share costs or speed up development. Even 
close competitors, such as BMW and Daimler or GM and Honda, are now working together, 
especially in the field of AD, to share the high development costs. For EVs, Volkswagen 
announced their openness to share their EV platform with other OEMs. Also, tier-1 suppliers 
and OEMs are intensifying their cooperation and are building strategic partnerships. For 
example, engineers from Daimler and Bosch are working together, colocated in two locations 
to develop HW and SW for AD. 
OEMs are also moving closer to strategically important tier-2 suppliers and tech companies 
and are using directed-buy or “direct buy” (by OEM) mechanisms for the sourcing of key 
components, and to gain access to IP, shape IP development, or secure critical supply. We see 
this, for example, for high-performance computing chips and other potential breakthrough 
technologies like LiDAR. These partnerships sometimes include financial investments by the 
OEMs. For example, for reasons stated above, Ford invested in the LiDAR company Velodyne. 
Also, tech companies are becoming a growing focus of OEMs. Volkswagen and Microsoft, for 
example, are building an automotive cloud platform together, a partnership that also signifies 
the move by players currently focused on consumer (electronics) into the automotive space. 
Besides Microsoft, Google has launched Google Automotive Services, including a partnership 
with and first deployment at Volvo1, while Samsung has shown interest in entering the 
automotive space with the acquisition of Harman. Not surprisingly, those companies primarily 
aim at infotainment and connected services with a direct link to the customer, yet they might 
move further down into other domains over time.
We also see the formation of ecosystems with several players along the value chain working 
closely together. One example would be the close collaboration of BMW, FCA, Intel, Magna, 
Aptiv, Continental, LiDAR supplier Innoviz, and SW specialists TTTech and KPIT to jointly 
develop an AD platform. Baidu is trying to build an open platform for AD with its OEM, tier-1 
supplier, tier-2 supplier, and research institution partners, sharing source code and data.
In summary, the traditional OEM-supplier relationship, especially in the fields of innovation 
in SW and electronics, is giving way to a variety of relationship models like strategic 
partnerships, directed-buy initiatives, minority and majority acquisitions, and different forms 
of alliances and joint ventures. These new forms of cooperation can be primarily observed in 
technology areas that are highly complex and/or characterized by deeply integrated systems, 
with value creation by different companies, impeding traditional sourcing mechanisms.
1 https://www.polestar.com/us/news/year-of-the-2-user-interface, 23.01.2019
Automotive software and electronics 2030
The emerging threats, but especially opportunities, 
resulting from the growing SW and E/E markets and their 
shifting dynamics call for action from most automotive 
companies and those who want to enter the industry. Due 
to fast-paced changes, it is imperative to map out and follow 
a clear strategy to ensure benefits from the disruptions 
in automotive and not be on the side of the disrupted. 
In the following section, we will describe emerging 
strategies by player type and provide an outlook on how 
companies can successfully navigate the landscape.4. Building blocks 
for mapping your 
automotive 
software and 
electronics strategy
4.1 Strategic considerations for each automotive player archetype
The trends described thus far will significantly impact all aspects of the automotive industry. 
Not only will they influence the strategic positions and outlook of all players, but they will also 
shape the products and influence the end customers who buy them. In the following, for each 
of the player archetypes (OEMs, tier-1 suppliers, tier-2/component suppliers, semiconductor 
companies, tech companies outside automotive, and engineering agencies/3rd-party SW 
developers), we discuss the implications of the trends and provide an overview of the areas 
requiring an adaptation to the future landscape. We then offer a way for each player to 
imagine a shift in orientation that will enable them to act on a concise set of strategy- and 
operations-focused actions.
Automotive OEMs need to develop a strategic perspective on SW and electronics
For OEMs, we see four main strategic implications of the shift in automotive SW and electronics:
Mitigate rising per-vehicle HW and SW costs
The HW and SW costs per vehicle can be expected to increase significantly by 2030. 
As they will unlikely be able to completely pass these costs on to end customers, OEMs 
should find mitigation strategies to reduce the HW and SW development costs. Examples 
include creating economies of scale through partnerships with other OEMs, using supplier 
components for nondifferentiating components with higher economies of scale, increasing 
reusability of SW between platforms and models, or simplifying the E/E architecture. 
Build SW development capabilities
In order to develop differentiating parts of the SW in house, OEMs should strengthen their 
SW capabilities. There are several ways to achieve this, including hiring additional experts, 
creating or acquiring dedicated business units or subsidiaries for SW development, or 
investing into development and validation tool chains.
Develop full-stack competencies
OEMs should increase their competencies along the full technology stack – i.e., across the 
elements of middleware, OS, HW abstraction layer, and cloud computing. This increased 
capacity will allow OEMs to specify the different technology stack elements in order to enable 
HW-SW separation and follow a best-of-breed sourcing approach. 
Create a cross-functional development organization
By breaking up their domain silos in the development organization and moving decision- 
making power for SW and E/E architecture to central departments, OEMs can speed up time 
to market for new E/E architecture definition and sourcing decisions. 
Tier-1 suppliers must react to the increased capabilities and changed sourcing 
behaviors of OEMs 
In order to do so, tier-1 suppliers can redefine their SW and E/E strategy through three 
strategic moves: 
Jointly define the E/E architecture
By becoming a thought partner, tier-1 suppliers can work with OEMs to cocreate a vision for 
the future E/E architecture and jointly shape the requirements. Tier-1 suppliers can seek to 
establish new partnerships or join existing ecosystems. 
Invest in SW development and integration capabilities
Tier-1 suppliers can become significant players in this growth area by building the necessary 
SW-related capabilities. To do so, however, they will need to win the war for talent (see below). 
They can also create a dedicated development, integration, and validation tool chain to enable 
continuous integration and development. 
Break down internal domain silos
As with OEMs, tier-1 suppliers also need to create a cross-functional organization to stay 
competitive in cross-domain offers and respond to their customers’ changing engineering 
needs/sources.
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Tier-2/component suppliers should think ahead and shape their space of differentiation
Increasingly centralized systems can favor larger tier-1 suppliers over specialized ECU 
providers. However, this and other market trends can also be a growth opportunity for tier-2 
suppliers if they take action in two areas:
Claim their space
Due to functional differentiation on the SW level, many electronics components will be subject 
to commoditization, putting margins under pressure, especially for suppliers down the value 
chain. Tier-2 suppliers need to find an attractive niche and then scale within that niche. 
Develop specialized SW capabilities
Specialized component suppliers have an opportunity to grow their business by adding certain 
SW capabilities (e.g., functional safety, artificial intelligence, or security capabilities) on top of 
their existing offering to larger tier-1 suppliers. They can even bypass them and supply directly to 
OEMs, or ensure that the OEM is directing the tier-1 supplier to use their components.
Semiconductor players are required to embrace the growing relevance of matters that 
were once only tangential 
For semiconductor players, we see three crucial prerequisites for success:
Think beyond your direct customer
Understanding the technology shifts at the end customer (i.e., OEM) and deriving the 
implications for your own strategic position is needed now more than ever. Due to the 
technology shifts described above, many products will become commoditized or even obsolete 
(e.g., general-purpose controllers), while others’ value will be maintained (e.g., specialized 
controllers) or even increase (e.g., power electronics). Semiconductor players need to 
understand this early, and they cannot wait for their direct tier-1 customers to tell them. 
Understand the requirements
Before making any investments, semiconductor players need to understand the end 
customer product requirements. Those might be very specific and, in contrast to the last 
decades, will have an impact even on the lowest elements of the technology stack. For 
example, OEM preferences for certain OSs that enable the OEM to scale its application SW 
have direct implications for HW and SW design on the chip level. Also, the importance of tool 
chain and services will grow. This growing importance also includes other features that are 
not directly product related but that are critical to product market success nonetheless. Here 
again, understanding the end customer’s requirements is crucial. For example, the OEM’s 
reluctance to create lock-in (e.g., in certain development tool chains) and the desire to reduce 
integration effort and cost (e.g., through the use of supplier-developed tool chains) need to be 
carefully weighed against each other. 
Place your bets wisely
While the opportunity in many segments is huge, so are, in many cases, the technology entry 
barriers or the competition. A realistic, objective assessment of a semiconductor player’s 
own ability to compete is a prerequisite for commercial success. The risk of making huge 
investments into technologies that will be commoditized or turn out to have a different natural 
owner is significant. 
That being said, the opportunity is huge, and those who approach it right have significant 
value to capture. Given the current early state of technology and market maturation, the future 
winners will have made the right choices today.
This similarly applies to engineering or (SW) development service providers and other 
tech companies from outside the automotive space. The technology borders between the 
automotive and the consumer electronics world will continue to be torn down. This will open 
up huge opportunities but also risks, for those who make efforts to enter the new markets. 
Automotive software and electronics 2030
4.2 First steps for all players in navigating the changing landscape 
Without doubt, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to tackling the challenges that the 
disruptive trends described in this report present to various players in the automotive industry. 
Yet, independent of their individual starting position or location along the automotive value 
chain, we see a set of clear actions that all companies need to assess to successfully navigate 
the changing landscape of automotive SW and electronics:
Beef up your SW and E/E architecture capabilities and become part of early, shaping 
discussions
While the overall trends in SW and E/E architecture are clearly materializing, there is a lot 
of ambiguity and uncertainty. Players that involve themselves in early concept and design 
phases will be in a better position to shape the concrete technological solution, structure the 
integration of components, and, ultimately, set themselves up to own a competitive share of 
the market.
Be ready to experiment as there is no silver bullet yet
For most technological challenges and business models, solutions are not yet set in stone, for 
example, for AD. Players that want to be successful in the emerging technologies, especially 
SW and electronics for AD and next-generation infotainment/services, will need to embrace a 
test-and-learn culture and be ready to experiment and quickly iterate learnings.
Critically review existing control points and expand the view on establishing ecosystems
Control points that are relevant today might become commodities tomorrow. Players that 
want to successfully navigate the market need to continuously and critically review their 
control points along the technology stack. Furthermore, the dynamics of establishing 
ecosystems can quickly disrupt complete domains and reshuffle control points, requiring 
players to closely monitor and observe changing ecosystem landscapes.
Establish partnerships in an emerging ecosystem
The rising complexity of SW and electronics systems in the car required for AD and other 
functionalities of the future will make it impossible for a single player to develop and maintain 
the system end to end. In addition, high R&D costs, especially for SW, require a large base 
of vehicles to distribute the costs; otherwise, costs per car would be prohibitive, even for the 
largest OEMs. This leads to the necessity of players to work together more intensely than in 
the past with deeper integration than traditional supplier-purchaser relationships.
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Appendix
Key aspects of the market models 
The insights of this report were generated based on closely linked qualitative and quantitative 
research. Our qualitative insights come from external and internal sources. In terms of 
external sources, we conducted a series of interviews with executives in the automotive 
industry that not only helped us challenge and refine our perspectives on the three key 
questions mentioned above but also provided us with hands-on insights that fueled our 
quantitative analyses. In terms of internal sources, we combined the knowledge of key 
experts within our automotive practice to build a holistic view on how ACES trends and various 
more specific drivers will influence the automotive SW and E/E market.
For our quantitative market insights, we built bottom-up market models for each of the core 
components within the automotive SW and E/E market:
 —SW development, integration, verification, and validation
 —ECUs/DCUs
 —Sensors
 —Power electronics
 —Other components (harnesses, controls, switches, displays).
For the first three of these market models we distinguish several automotive domains to 
ensure that we have the proper granularity within each model:
 —Powertrain
 —Chassis
 —Body
 —ADAS
 —AD
 —Infotainment.
At the highest level, each model, except that for automotive SW (see paragraph below for 
details), follows the same logic. The market size in a given year is calculated as the product of 
the number of components (e.g., the number of ECUs) per vehicle, their ASPs, and the number 
of vehicles produced in a given year. The calculation also takes into account differences, e.g., 
in take rate, price, between vehicle segments, OEM types, SAE AV levels (see “Definitions” on 
page 42 for details), and powertrain types. Specifically, for ECUs/DCUs, we have excluded the 
value of the SW content (OS, middleware, functions) from the model to avoid double counting. 
The market value is comprised of the supplier value generation and components sold to the 
OEM. For DCUs, for example, this includes not only the integrated circuits but, among others, 
also the printed circuit board, memory, I/O connectors, thermal control, housing and the 
value add of development, integration, and component testing of the component at the tier-1 
supplier. Next to the aforementioned sources of insight, we integrated findings from market 
research companies such as Strategy Analytics and IHS Markit as an additional validation.
The number of vehicles produced each year is provided by a separate model in which we 
incorporate data from the latest McKinsey Center for Future Mobility (MCFM) market outlook, 
the McKinsey EV market model, and the MCFM mobility of the future scenario analysis. 
We distinguish a “base case” with moderate growth in EVs and AVs by 2030 as well as an 
“accelerated AV adoption case” with a much steeper growth in both vehicle types, but lower
Automotive software and electronics 2030
overall vehicle production due to cannibalization of private vehicles production through 
autonomous shared vehicles. Note that numbers presented in this article refer to the 
base case except where explicitly stated otherwise. In the vehicle production model, we 
differentiate production volumes by different categories, i.e., geography, OEM type (volume 
vs. premium), vehicle class, powertrain type, and SAE AV level. This differentiation is also 
present within the market models for each element of the automotive SW and E/E market. 
Hence, depending on the combination of the categories, such as SAE AV level and vehicle 
class, we assumed different values for the number of components and their ASP where 
appropriate. 
Given the significant uncertainty around the emerging SW market and the core elements, 
such as price points, monetization, sourcing models, and value chain/value capture, the 
automotive SW market model follows a different logic than those of HW components. 
The model considers the workforce required to build, maintain, and upgrade individual 
SW functionalities over time as the key driver of market size, taking into account typical 
supplier margins for SW as well. The model factors in the number of vehicle platforms and 
variants across OEMs and tiers, as well as their temporal evolution, are used to obtain a 
realistic perspective on the market size. To ensure consistency with the other models for E/E 
components, the applicability of the various SW functions across powertrains and SAE AV 
levels is also considered. Distribution of the market between OEMs, tier-1 suppliers, and other 
companies (e.g., IT service providers, engineering service providers) is not taken into account. 
Due to the nature of this approach, the market already occurs during the development phase 
and not only after SOP as for the other models.
To pressure-test the results of our modeling, we conducted workshops with Global 
Semiconductor Alliance members in North America, Europe, and Asia. Based on workshop 
feedback we iterated the models towards the version presented in this report. 
Automotive software and electronics 2030
List of abbreviations
ACES Autonomous driving, connected vehicles, 
 electrification of the powertrain, shared mobility 
AD Autonomous driving
ADAS Advanced driver assistance systems
ASP Average selling price
AV Autonomous vehicle
BEV Battery electric vehicle
BJB Battery junction box
BMS Battery management system 
CAGR Compound annual growth rate
CMC Cell management controller
DC/DC Direct current to direct current
DCU Domain control unit
E/E Electrical and electronic
ECU Electronic control unit
EMS Electronics manufacturing services 
EV Electric vehicle
HEV Hybrid electric vehicle
HV High voltage
HW Hardware
ICE Internal combustion engine
I/O Input/output
LiDAR Light detection and ranging
LV Low voltage
MCFM McKinsey Center for Future Mobility
OEM Original equipment manufacturer
OS Operating system
PHEV Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle
SOP Start of production
SW Software
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Definitions 
SAE AV levels1
Vehicle classes
Although there is no Europe-wide formal characterization or regulation of vehicle segments, 
an EU document2 mentions the following classes:
A: mini cars
B: small cars
C: medium cars
D: large cars
E: executive cars
F: luxury cars
J: sport utility cars (including off-road vehicles)
M: multi-purpose cars (including pickups)
S: sports cars  
1 Source: SAE International J3016
2 Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 – Merger Procedure
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Important notice
This report has been prepared by a McKinsey team based on public sources, extensive 
research, and proprietary information gathered both via in-depth interviews with industry 
thought leaders and from IHS Markit’s Light Vehicle Production Forecast (2018).
Neither the report nor any part of its contents is intended or suited to constitute the basis 
of any investment decision regarding any company operating in the markets covered by this 
report or any similar markets (including, without limitation, the purchase of any securities of 
any listed company or in connection with the listing of any company).
This report contains certain forward-looking statements (i.e., estimates, forecasts, and 
projections about industries, trends, players, and consumers). By their nature, forward-
looking statements involve uncertainties because they relate to events that may or may not 
occur in the future. This applies particularly to statements in this report containing information 
on future developments; earnings capacity; plans and expectations regarding the business, 
growth, and profitability of companies operating in the markets covered by the manufacturing 
industry or any related markets; and general economic and regulatory conditions and other 
factors that affect such companies. Forward-looking statements in this report are based on 
current estimates and assumptions that are made to the McKinsey team’s best knowledge. 
These forward-looking statements and the overall markets about which they are made 
are subject to risks, uncertainties, and other factors that could cause actual situations and 
developments to differ materially from those expressly or implicitly predicted by these 
forward-looking statements or not occur at all. In addition, McKinsey does not assume any 
obligation to update any forward-looking statements or to conform these forward-looking 
statements to actual events or developments.
McKinsey does not assume any responsibility towards any persons for the correctness and 
completeness of the information contained in this report.
Automotive software and electronics 2030
Contacts and 
authors 
Content contributors
Christian Knochenhauer, Senior Expert, Berlin
Georg Doll, Vice President IoT, Munich
Martin Kellner, Engagement Manager, Munich
Silviu Apostu, Consultant, Munich
Florian Haubner, Consultant, Frankfurt
Michaela Brandl, Consultant, Munich
Julia Werra, Consultant, Berlin
Denis Hörner, Research Analyst, MunichJan Paul Stein is an Engagement Manager in 
McKinsey’s Munich office. 
jan_paul_stein@mckinsey.comJohannes Deichmann is an Associate Partner in 
McKinsey’s Stuttgart office. 
johannes_deichmann@mckinsey.comOndrej Burkacky is a Partner in 
McKinsey’s Munich office. 
ondrej_burkacky@mckinsey.com
Automotive software and electronics 2030

Advanced Industries – Automotive & Assembly 
July 2019 
Copyright © McKinsey & Company 
Designed by Visual Media Europe
www.mckinsey.com